Empathy is a quality that is essential
for effective disciple-making.
Interestingly, the word “empathy”
doesn’t occur in the main text
of the New World Translation,
but the idea is clearly conveyed
in expressions like “fellow feeling.”
Jehovah and Jesus Christ
are beautiful examples
of ones who display empathy
in their dealings with others.
For example, Jehovah said to his people:
“Whoever touches you
touches the pupil of my eye.”
Empathy.
And when Jesus was approached by a leper
begging to be healed,
what was Jesus’ response?
The account tells us
that he reached out his hand,
touched the man, and said: “I want to!”
Empathy.
Empathy is the ability to understand
another person’s thinking,
feelings, concerns, anxieties.
It may not come naturally,
but it can be cultivated.
The Scriptures provide us with examples
of individuals who were empathetic.
For example, the apostle Paul,
who was a very effective disciple-maker,
was also empathetic.
Turn in your Bible, please,
to 1 Thessalonians chapter 2,
and let’s read verses 7 and 8:
“On the contrary,
we became gentle in your midst,
“as when a nursing mother
“tenderly cares for her own children.
“So having tender affection for you,
“we were determined to impart to you,
“not only the good news of God
“but also our very selves,
because you became so beloved to us.”
How did Paul approach his ministry?
Well, he says he was “gentle,”
he displayed “tender affection,”
and those who responded to the good news
became “beloved to [him].”
Paul uses a very powerful illustration
—that of a mother caring for her children.
In the human context,
there is probably no more
powerful example of empathy
than that of a mother.
She feels her child’s pain.
When her child rejoices, she rejoices.
When her child weeps, she weeps.
Empathy.
And did you notice,
Paul said that he was ‘determined to impart
not only the good news of God
but his own soul’?
Isn’t it true
that as we help individuals today,
it’s not a matter of only imparting
the facts of the truth?
Bible students need help in many ways.
And like the apostle Paul,
we’re self-sacrificing,
willing to put the interests of others
ahead of our own interests.
We’re empathetic.
In the following dramatization,
take note of how Neeta
provides practical assistance
to her Bible student.
I’m sorry I’m late.
It’s fine.
Is this mine?
My treat.
Ah, brilliant! Thanks.
I didn’t have any breakfast.
So we left off at paragraph 10.
Listen, I don’t have it in me today.
I got like two hours of sleep.
Are you all right?
I’m just super stressed—can’t focus.
I’m really sorry.
My boyfriend, school,
work, everything else
—I just don’t even have time to breathe.
When my schedule gets a bit crazy,
I focus on organizing what I can.
How’s that?
I give everything a proper place.
Yeah, I’m not really
the organization type.
But I can help,
I mean, if you want.
I guess a little help couldn’t hurt.
So how organized
is your place right now?
OK, well,
“with God all things are possible.”
Where shall we start?
You’re the neat freak. You tell me.
Let’s try and find the bed;
we’ll work from there.
Did you notice?
How did Neeta display empathy?
Well, she was observant,
she was a good listener,
and she offered practical assistance,
didn’t she?
She had some food for her Bible student.
And at the end of the dramatization,
she was helping in other practical ways.
And I think we would all agree
that she showed fellow feeling
for her Bible student.
You and I have to do these things as well.
Be observant.
What do you know about your Bible student?
What are the student’s circumstances in life?
What is the student’s family situation?
Does the student have hobbies, interests?
What is the religious background?
What does your student believe?
Well, be observant, and ask good questions.
And when you ask a question,
give your student time to answer.
What is our inclination
when we ask our student a question
and the answer doesn’t come quickly?
We tend to jump in to save our student,
but that approach isn’t really helpful.
When you ask a question, be patient
—allow the student
time to think and to respond.
And when the student responds, be positive
—commend the student
for being honest, forthright,
even if the answer
is not exactly what you were hoping for.
And keep in mind
that as we observe and listen
and ask questions
and display personal interest,
we’re very careful not to pry into matters
that are really not our business.
And we don’t want to show
inappropriate interest
by becoming overly familiar
with the Bible student.
Does your Bible student
need practical assistance?
Well, as we listen and observe,
we’re in a position to share information
that will be truly helpful to the student.
Avoid the tendency
—the temptation—
to give superficial advice.
It’s much better to meditate, do research,
and then you can give the student
tailored Bible-based advice
taken from Bible-based publications
that specifically address
the student’s needs.
And that is beautiful.
Be prepared, too,
to explain how to apply the counsel.
People’s lives are so complicated;
they face so many challenges
that they may not know how.
So explain, but don’t pressure.
The best change
always comes from the inside out.
In other words, the Bible student’s heart
should motivate him or her
to make necessary adjustments in life.
Does your student need
transportation to the Kingdom Hall?
Well, assist him.
It may be that you can provide
transportation yourself,
or it may be a matter of helping the student
to know where the Kingdom Hall is
and then helping him to understand
the public transportation system.
But whatever help is needed,
take those steps.
Ensure that your student
has wholesome association.
As time goes by,
your student is sure
to lose former associates,
either because the student decides
or the former associates decide.
Fill the void,
and include your student
in gatherings in keeping
with his spiritual advancement
and as appropriate.
Finally, show fellow feeling.
Remember, empathy is not a technique;
it’s a quality that springs from the heart.
And it’s communicated in so many ways,
not just by our words and our actions
but by our facial expressions,
our gestures, our body language
—all communicate a message to the student.
And the student will discern very quickly
if our words and actions
are motivated by love.
If they are,
then we are demonstrating empathy
and reflecting the love and concern
that Jehovah has for the Bible student.
And that is what will draw
the student to Jehovah.
What a privilege we have to share
in this vital disciple-making work!
With Jehovah’s help,
may each of us succeed
in showing the quality of empathy.
Brother Gary Breaux,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will now present
the final part of the symposium,
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making
—Improve Your Skills—Reaching the Heart.”